14.1.2 Elementary properties 
Here are the basic properties of groups that we need: (i) Subgroups: If a subset of elements of a group forms a group, it is called a subgroup. For example, Z12 has a subgroup consisting of {0, 3, 6, 9}. Any group G possesses at least two subgroups: the entirety of G itself, and the subgroup containing only the identity element {e}. These are known as the trivial subgroups. Any other subgroups are called proper subgroups. (ii) Cosets: Given a subgroup H ⊆ G, having elements {h1 , h2 , . . .}, and an element g ∈ G, we form the (left) coset gH = {gh1 , gh2 , . . .}. If two cosets g1H and g2H intersect, they coincide. (Proof: if g1h1 = g2h2 , then g2 = g1(h1h−1 2 ) and so g1H = g2H .) If H is a finite group, each coset has the same number of distinct elements as H . (Proof: if gh1 = gh2 then left multiplication by g−1 shows that h1 = h2 .) If the order of G is also finite, the group G is decomposed into an integer number of cosets, G = g1H + g2H + · · · , (14.1) where “+” denotes the union of disjoint sets. From this we see that the order of H must divide the order of G. This result is called Lagrange’s theorem. The set whose elements are the cosets is denoted by G/H . (iii) Normal subgroups: A subgroup H = {h1 , h2 , . . . } of G is said to be normal, or invariant, if g−1Hg = H for all g ∈ G. This notation means that the set of elements g−1Hg = {g−1h1g, g−1h2g, . . .} coincides with H , or equivalently that the map h ( → g−1hg does not take h ∈ H out of H , but simply scrambles the order of the elements of H . (iv) Quotient groups: Given a normal subgroup H , we can define a multiplication rule on the set of cosets G/H ≡ {g1H , g2H , . . .} by taking a representative element from each of g i H , and gj H , taking the product of these elements, and defining (g i H )(g j H ) to be the coset in which this product lies. This coset is independent of the representative elements chosen (this would not be so were the subgroup not normal). The resulting group is called the quotient group of G by H , and is denoted by G/H . (Note that the symbol “G/H ” is used to denote both the set of cosets, and, when it exists, the group whose elements are these cosets.) (v) Simple groups: A group G with no normal subgroups is said to be sim- ple. The finite simple groups have been classified. They fall into various infinite families (cyclic groups, alternating groups, 16 families of Lie type) together with 26 sporadic groups, the largest of which, the Monster, has order 808,017,424,794,512,875,886,459,904,961,710,757,005,754, 368,000,000, 000. The mysterious “Monstrous moonshine” links its representation theory to the elliptic modular function J (τ ) and to string theory. (vi) Conjugacy and conjugacy classes: Two group elements g1 , g2 are said to be con- jugate in G if there is an element g ∈ G such that g2 = g−1g1g. If g1 is conjugate to g2 , we write g1 ∼ g2 . Conjugacy is an equivalence relation, 2 and, for finite groups, the resulting conjugacy classes have orders that divide the order of G. To see this, consider the conjugacy class containing the element g. Observe that the set H of elements h ∈ G such that h−1gh = g forms a subgroup. The set of elements conjugate to g can be identified with the coset space G/H . The order of G divided by the order of the conjugacy class is therefore |H |.